
THE BROKEN CUP

By Johann Heinrich Daniel Zschokke

Translated by P. G.

Copyright, 1891, by The Current Literature Publishing Company


Author’s Note.--There is extant under this name a short piece by the
author of “Little Kate of Heilbronn.” That and the tale which here
follows originated in an incident which took place at Bern in the year
1802. Henry von Kleist and Ludwig Wieland, the son of the poet, were
both friends of the writer, in whose chamber hung an engraving called
_La Cruche Cassée_, the persons and contents of which resembled the
scene set forth below, under the head of The Tribunal. The drawing,
which was full of expression, gave great delight to those who saw it,
and led to many conjectures as to its meaning. The three friends agreed,
in sport, that they would each one day commit to writing his peculiar
interpretation of its design. Wieland promised a satire; Von Kleist
threw off a comedy; and the author of the following tale what is here
given.





MARIETTA.

NAPOULE, it is true, is only a very little place on the bay of Cannes;
yet it is pretty well known through all Provence. It lies in the shade
of lofty evergreen palms, and darker orange trees; but that alone would
not make it renowned. Still they say that there are grown the most
luscious grapes, the sweetest roses, and the handsomest girls. I don’t
know but it is so; in the mean time I believe it most readily. Pity that
Napoule is so small, and can not produce more luscious grapes, fragrant
roses, and handsome maidens; especially, as we might then have some of
them transplanted to our own country.

As, ever since the foundation of Napoule, all the Napoulese women have
been beauties, so the little Marietta was a wonder of wonders, as the
chronicles of the place declare. She was called the _little_ Marietta; yet
she was not smaller than a girl of seventeen or thereabout ought to be,
seeing that her forehead just reached up to the lips of a grown man.

The chronicles aforesaid had very good ground for speaking of Marietta.
I, had I stood in the shoes of the chronicler, would have done the
same. For Marietta, who until lately had lived with her mother Manon
at Avignon, when she came back to her birthplace, quite upset the whole
village. Verily, not the houses, but the people and their heads; and not
the heads of all the people, but of those particularly whose heads and
hearts are always in danger when in the neighborhood of two bright eyes.
I know very well that such a position is no joke.

Mother Manon would have done much better if she had remained at Avignon.
But she had been left a small inheritance, by which she received at
Napoule an estate consisting of some vine-hills, and a house that lay in
the shadow of a rock, between certain olive trees and African acacias.
This is a kind of thing which no unprovided widow ever rejects; and,
accordingly, in her own estimation, she was as rich and happy as though
she were the Countess of Provence or something like it.

So much the worse was it for the good people of Napoule. They never
suspected their misfortune, not having read in Homer how a single pretty
woman had filled all Greece and Lesser Asia with discord and war.




HOW THE MISFORTUNE CAME ABOUT.

Marietta had scarcely been fourteen days in the house, between the olive
trees and the African acacias, before every young man of Napoule knew
that she lived there, and that there lived not, in all Provence, a more
charming girl than the one in that house.

Went she through the village, sweeping lightly along like a dressed-up
angel, her frock, with its pale-green bodice, and orange leaves and
rosebuds upon the bosom of it, fluttering in the breeze, and flowers
and ribbons waving about the straw bonnet, which shaded her beautiful
features--yes, then the grave old men spake out, and the young ones were
struck dumb. And everywhere, to the right and left, little windows and
doors were opened with a “Good morning,” or a “Good evening, Marietta,”
 as it might be, while she nodded to the right and left with a pleasant
smile.

If Marietta walked into church, all hearts (that is, of the young
people) forgot Heaven; all eyes turned from the saints, and the
worshiping finger wandered idly among the pearls of the rosary. This
must certainly have provoked much sorrow, at least, among the more
devout.

The maidens of Napoule particularly became very pious about this time,
for they, most of all, took the matter to heart. And they were not to
be blamed for it; for since the advent of Marietta more than one
prospective groom had become cold, and more than one worshipper of some
beloved one quite inconstant. There were bickerings and reproaches on
all sides, many tears, pertinent lectures, and even rejections. The talk
was no longer of marriages, but of separations. They began to return
their pledges of troth, rings, ribbons, etc. The old persons took part
with their children; criminations and strife spread from house to house;
it was most deplorable.

Marietta is the cause of all, said the pious maidens first; then the
mothers said it; next the fathers took it up; and finally all--even the
young men. But Marietta, shielded by her modesty and innocence, like
the petals of the rosebud in its dark-green calix, did not suspect
the mischief of which she was the occasion, and continued courteous to
everybody. This touched the young men, who said, “Why condemn the pure
and harmless child--she is not guilty!” Then the fathers said the same
thing; then the mothers took it up, and finally all--even the pious
maidens. For, let who would talk with Marietta, she was sure to gain
their esteem. So before half a year had passed, everybody had spoken to
her, and everybody loved her. But she did not suspect that she was the
object of such general regard, as she had not before suspected that she
was the object of dislike. Does the violet, hidden in the downtrodden
grass, think how sweet it is?

Now every one wished to make amends for the injustice they had done
Marietta. Sympathy deepened the tenderness of their attachment. Marietta
found herself greeted everywhere in a more friendly way than ever; she
was more cordially welcomed; more heartily invited to the rural sports
and dances.




ABOUT THE WICKED COLIN.

All men, however, are not endowed with tender sympathy; some have
hearts hardened like Pharaoh’s. This arises, no doubt, from that natural
depravity which has come upon men in consequence of the fall of Adam, or
because, at their baptism, the devil is not brought sufficiently under
subjection.

A remarkable example of this hardness of heart was given by one Colin,
the richest farmer and proprietor in Napoule, whose vineyards and olive
gardens, whose lemon and orange trees could hardly be counted in a day.
One thing particularly demonstrates the perverseness of his disposition;
he was twenty-seven years old, and had never yet asked for what purpose
girls had been created!

True, all the people, especially damsels of a certain age, willingly
forgave him this sin, and looked upon him as one of the best young men
under the sun. His fine figure, his fresh, unembarrassed manner, his
look, his laugh, enabled him to gain the favorable opinion of the
aforesaid people, who would have forgiven him, had there been occasion,
any one of the deadly sins. But the decision of such judges is not
always to be trusted. While both old and young at Napoule had become
reconciled to the innocent Marietta, and proffered their sympathies
to her, Colin was the only one who had no pity upon the poor child. If
Marietta was talked of he became as dumb as a fish. If he met her in the
street he would turn red and white with anger, and cast sidelong glances
at her of the most malicious kind.

If at evening the young people met upon the seashore near the old castle
ruins for sprightly pastimes, or rural dances, or to sing catches,
Colin was the merriest among them. But as soon as Marietta arrived the
rascally fellow was silent, and all the gold in the world couldn’t
make him sing.--What a pity, when he had such a fine voice! Everybody
listened to it so willingly, and its store of songs was endless.

All the maidens looked kindly upon Colin, and he was friendly with all
of them. He had, as we have said, a roguish glance, which the lasses
feared and loved; and it was so sweet they would like to have had it
painted. But, as might naturally be expected, the offended Marietta
did not look graciously upon him. And in that he was perfectly right.
Whether he smiled or not, it was all the same to her. As to his roguish
glance, why she would never hear it mentioned; and therein too she
was perfectly right. When he told a tale (and he knew thousands) and
everybody listened, she nudged her neighbor, or perhaps threw tufts of
grass at Peter or Paul, and laughed and chattered, and did not listen to
Colin at all. This behavior quite provoked the proud fellow, so that he
would break off in the middle of his story and stalk sullenly away.

Revenge is sweet. The daughter of Mother Manon well knew how to triumph.
Yet Marietta was a right good child and quite too tenderhearted. If
Colin was silent, it gave her pain. If he was downcast, she laughed no
more. If he went away, she did not stay long behind: but hurried to her
home, and wept tears of repentance, more beautiful than those of the
Magdalen, although she had not sinned like the Magdalen.




THE CUP.

Father Jerome, the pastor of Napoule, was an old man of seventy, who
possessed all the virtues of a saint, and only one failing; which was,
that by reason of his advanced years, he was hard of hearing. But, on
that very account, his homilies were more acceptable to the children of
his baptism and blessing. True, he preached only of two subjects, as if
they comprehended the whole of religion. It was either “Little children,
love one another,” or it was “Mysterious are the ways of Providence.”
 And truly there is so much Faith, Love, and Hope in these that one might
at a pinch be saved by them. The little children loved one another most
obediently, and trusted in the ways of Providence. Only Colin, with his
flinty heart, would know nothing of either: for even when he professed
to be friendly, he entertained the deepest malice.

The Napoulese went to the annual market or fair of the city of Vence.
It was truly a joyful time, and though they had but little gold to buy
with, there were many goods to look at. Now Marietta and Mother Manon
went to the fair with the rest, and Colin was also there. He bought a
great many curiosities and trifles for his friends--but he would not
spend a farthing for Marietta. And yet he was always at her elbow,
though he did not speak to her, nor she to him. It was easy to see that
he was brooding over some scheme of wickedness.

Mother Manon stood gazing before a shop, when she suddenly exclaimed:

“Oh! Marietta, see that beautiful cup! A queen would not be ashamed to
raise it to her lips. Only see: the edge is of dazzling gold, and the
flowers upon it could not bloom more beautifully in the garden, although
they are only painted. And in the midst of this Paradise! pray see,
Marietta, how the apples are smiling on the trees. They are verily
tempting. And Adam cannot withstand it, as the enchanting Eve offers
him one for food! And do see how prettily the little frisking lamb skips
around the old tiger, and the snow-white dove with her golden throat
stands there before the vulture, as if she would caress him.”

Marietta could not satisfy herself with looking. “Had I such a cup,
mother!” said she, “it is far too beautiful to drink out of: I would
place my flowers in it and constantly peep into Paradise. We are at the
fair in Vence, but when I look on the picture I feel as if I were in
Paradise.”

So spoke Marietta, and called her companions to the spot, to share her
admiration of the cup: but the young men soon joined the maidens, until
at length almost half the inhabitants of Napoule were assembled before
the wonderfully beautiful cup. But miraculously beautiful was it mainly
from its inestimable, translucent porcelain, with gilded handles and
glowing colors. They asked the merchant timidly: “Sir, what is the price
of it?” And he answered: “Among friends, it is worth a hundred livres.”
 Then they all became silent, and went away in despair. When the
Napoulese were all gone from the front of the shop, Colin came there by
stealth, threw the merchant a hundred livres upon the counter, had the
cup put in a box well packed with cotton, and then carried it off. What
evil plans he had in view no one would have surmised.

Near Napoule, on his way home, it being already dusk, he met old
Jacques, the Justice’s servant, returning from the fields. Jacques was a
very good man, but excessively stupid.

“I will give thee money enough to get something to drink, Jacques,” said
Colin, “if thou wilt bear this box to Manon’s house, and leave it there;
and if any one should see thee, and inquire from whom the box came, say
‘A stranger gave it to me.’ But never disclose my name, or I will always
detest thee.”

Jacques promised this, took the drink-money and the box, and went with
it toward the little dwelling between the olive trees and the African
acacias.




THE CARRIER.

Before he arrived there he encountered his master, Justice Hautmartin,
who asked; “Jacques, what art thou carrying?”

“A box for Mother Manon. But, sir, I cannot say from whom it comes.”

“Why not?”

“Because Colin would always detest me.”

“It is well that thou canst keep a secret. But it is already late; give
me the box, for I am going to-morrow to see Mother Manon; I will deliver
it to her and not betray that it came from Colin. It will save thee a
walk, and furnish me a good excuse for calling on the old lady.”

Jacques gave the box to his master, whom he was accustomed to obey
implicitly in all things. The justice bore it into his chamber, and
examined it by the light with some curiosity. On the lid was neatly
written with red chalk: “For the lovely and dear Marietta.” But Monsieur
Hautmartin well knew that this was some of Colin’s mischief, and that
some knavish trick lurked under the whole. He therefore opened the box
carefully for fear that a mouse or rat should be concealed within.
When he beheld the wondrous cup, which he had seen at Vence, he was
dreadfully shocked, for Monsieur Hautmartin was a skilful casuist, and
knew that the inventions and devices of the human heart are evil from
our youth upward. He saw at once that Colin designed this cup as a
means of bringing misfortune upon Marietta: perhaps to give out, when it
should be in her possession, that it was the present of some successful
lover in the town, or the like, so that all decent people would
thereafter keep aloof from Marietta. Therefore Monsieur Hautmartin
resolved, in order to prevent any evil reports, to profess himself
the giver. Moreover, he loved Marietta, and would gladly have seen her
observe more strictly toward himself the sayings of the gray-headed
priest Jerome, “Little children, love one another.” In truth, Monsieur
Hautmartin was a little child of fifty years old, and Marietta did
not think the saying applied particularly to him. Mother Manon, on the
contrary, thought that the justice was a clever little child, he had
gold and a high reputation from one end of Napoule to the other. And
when the justice spoke of marriage, and Marietta ran away in affright,
Mother Manon remained sitting, and had no fear for the tall, staid
gentleman. It must also be confessed there were no faults in his person.
And although Colin might be the handsomest man in the village, yet the
justice far surpassed him in two things, namely, in the number of years,
and in a very, very big nose. Yes, this nose, which always went before
the justice like a herald to proclaim his approach, was a real elephant
among human noses.

With this proboscis, his good purpose, and the cup, the justice went the
following morning to the house between the olive trees and the African
acacias.

“For the beautiful Marietta,” said he, “I hold nothing too costly.
Yesterday you admired the cup at Vence; to-day allow me, lovely
Marietta, to lay it and my devoted heart at your feet.”

Manon and Marietta were transported beyond measure when they beheld the
cup. Manon’s eyes glistened with delight, but Marietta turned and said:
“I can neither take your heart nor your cup.”

Then Mother Marion was angry, and cried out: “But I accept both heart
and cup. Oh, thou little fool, how long wilt thou despise thy good
fortune! For whom dost thou tarry? Will a count of Provence make thee
his bride, that thou scornest the Justice of Napoule? I know better how
to look after my interests. Monsieur Hautmartin, I deem it an honor to
call thee my son-in-law.”

Then Marietta went out and wept bitterly, and hated the beautiful cup
with all her heart.

But the justice, drawing the palm of his flabby hand over his nose,
spoke thus judiciously:

“Mother Manon, hurry nothing. The dove will at length, when it learns
to know me better, give way. I am not impetuous. I have some skill among
women, and before a quarter of a year passes by I will insinuate myself
into Marietta’s good graces.”

“Thy nose is too large for that,” whispered Marietta, who listened
outside the door and laughed to herself. In fact, the quarter of a year
passed by and Monsieur Hautmartin had not yet pierced the heart even
with the tip of his nose.




THE FLOWERS.

During this quarter of a year Marietta had other affairs to attend to.
The cup gave her much vexation and trouble, and something else besides.

For a fortnight nothing else was talked of in Napoule, and every one
said it is a present from the justice, and the marriage is already
agreed upon. Marietta solemnly declared to all her companions that she
would rather plunge to the bottom of the sea than marry the justice,
but the maidens continued to banter her all the more, saying: “Oh, how
blissful it must be to repose in the shadow of his nose!” This was her
first vexation.

Then Mother Manon had the cruelty to force Marietta to rinse out the
cup every morning at the spring under the rock and to fill it with fresh
flowers. She hoped by this to accustom Marietta to the cup and heart of
the giver. But Marietta continued to hate both the gift and giver, and
her work at the spring became an actual punishment.

Second vexation.

Then, when in the morning, she came to the spring, twice every week she
found on the rock, immediately over it, some most beautiful flowers,
handsomely arranged, all ready for the decoration of the cup. And on the
flower-stalks a strip of paper was always tied, on which was written,
“Dear Marietta.” Now no one need expect to impose upon little Marietta
as if magicians and fairies were still in the world. Consequently she
knew that both the flowers and papers must have come from Monsieur
Hautmartin. Marietta, indeed, would not smell them because the living
breath from out of the justice’s nose had perfumed them. Nevertheless
she took the flowers, because they were finer than wild flowers, and
tore the slip of paper into a thousand pieces, which she strewed upon
the spot where the flowers usually lay. But this did not vex Justice
Hautmartin, whose love was unparalleled in its kind as his nose was in
its kind. Third vexation.

At length it came out in conversation with Monsieur Hautmartin that
he was not the giver of the beautiful flowers. Then who could it be?
Marietta was utterly astounded at the unexpected discovery. Thenceforth
she took the flowers from the rock more kindly; but, further, Marietta
was--what maidens are not wont to be--very inquisitive. She conjectured
first this and then that young man in Napoule. Yet her conjectures were
in vain. She looked and listened far into the night; she rose earlier
than usual But she looked and listened in vain. And still twice a week
in the morning the miraculous flowers lay upon the rock, and upon the
strip of paper wound round them she always read the silent sigh, “Dear
Marietta!” Such an incident would have made even the most indifferent
inquisitive. But curiosity at length became a burning pain. Fourth
vexation.




WICKEDNESS UPON WICKEDNESS.

Now Father Jerome, on Sunday, had again preached from the text:
“Mysterious are the dispensations of Providence.” And little Marietta
thought, if Providence would only dispense that I might at length find
out who is the flower dispenser. Father Jerome was never wrong.

On a summer night, when it was far too warm to rest, Marietta awoke very
early, and could not resume her sleep. Therefore she sprang joyously
from her couch as the first streaks of dawn flashed against the window
of her little chamber, over the waves of the sea and the Lerinian Isles,
dressed herself, and went out to wash her forehead, breast, and arms in
the cool spring. She took her hat with her, intending to take a walk by
the sea-shore, as she knew of a retired place for bathing.

In order to reach this retired spot, it was necessary to pass over the
rocks behind the house, and thence down through the orange and palm
trees. On this occasion Marietta could not pass through them; for,
under the youngest and most slender of the palms lay a tall young man
in profound sleep--near him a nosegay of most splendid flowers. A white
paper lay thereon, from which probably a sigh was again breathing. How
could Marietta get by there?

She stood still, trembling with fright. She would go home again. Hardly
had she retreated a couple of steps, ere she looked again at the sleeper
and remained motionless. Yet the distance prevented her from recognizing
his face. Now the mystery was to be solved, or never. She tripped
lightly nearer to the palms; but he seemed to stir--then she ran again
toward the cottage. His movements were but the fearful imaginings of
Marietta. Now she returned again on her way toward the palms; but his
sleep might perhaps be only dissembled--swiftly she ran toward the
cottage--but who would flee for a mere probability? She trod more boldly
the path toward the palms.

With these fluctuations of her timid and joyous spirit, between fright
and curiosity, with these to-and-fro trippings between the house and
the palm-trees, she at length nearly approached the sleeper; at the same
time curiosity became more powerful than fear.

“What is he to me? My way leads me directly past him. Whether he sleeps
or wakes, I will go straight on.” So thought Manon’s daughter. But
she passed not by, but stood looking directly in the face of the
flower-giver, in order to be certain who it was. Besides, he slept as if
it were the first time in a month. And who was it? Now, who else should
it be but the archwicked Colin.

So it was _he_ who had annoyed the gentle maiden, and given her so much
trouble with Monsieur Hautmartin, because he bore a grudge against her;
he had been the one who had teased her with flowers, in order to torture
her curiosity. Wherefore? He hated Marietta. He behaved himself always
most shamefully toward the poor child. He avoided her when he could; and
when he could not, he grieved the good-natured little one. With all the
other maidens of Napoule he was more chatty, friendly, courteous, than
toward Marietta. Consider--he had never once asked her to dance, and yet
she danced bewitchingly.

Now there he lay, surprised, taken in the act. Revenge swelled in
Marietta’s bosom. What disgrace could she subject him to? She took the
nosegay, unloosened it, strewed his present over the sleeper in scorn.
But the paper, on which appeared again the sigh, “Dear Marietta!” she
retained, and thrust quickly into her bosom. She wished to preserve this
proof of his handwriting. Marietta was sly. Now she would go away. But
her revenge was not yet satisfied. She could not leave the place without
returning Colin’s ill-will.

She took the violet-colored silken ribbon from her hat, and threw it
lightly around the sleeper’s arm and around the tree, and with three
knots tied Colin fast. Now when he awoke, how astonished he would be!
How his curiosity would torment him to ascertain who had played him this
trick! He could not possibly know. So much the better; it served him
right. She seemed to regret her work when she had finished it. Her bosom
throbbed impetuously. Indeed, I believe that a little tear filled her
eye, as she compassionately gazed upon the guilty one. Slowly
she retreated to the orange grove by the rocks--she looked around
often--slowly ascended the rocks, looking down among the palm trees as
she ascended. Then she hastened to Mother Manon, who was calling her.




THE HAT BAND.

That very day Colin practised new mischief. What did he? He wished to
shame the poor Marietta publicly. Ah! she never thought that every one
in Napoule knew her violet-colored ribbon! Colin remembered it but too
well. Proudly he bound it around his hat, and exhibited it to the gaze
of all the world as a conquest. And male and female cried out: “He has
received it from Marietta.”--And all the maidens said angrily: “The
reprobate!” And all the young men who liked to see Marietta cried out:
“The reprobate!”

“How! Mother Manon?” shrieked the Justice Hautmartin when he came to her
house, and he shrieked so loudly that it re-echoed wonderfully through
his nose. “How! do you suffer this? my betrothed presents the young
proprietor Colin with her hat-band! It is high time that we celebrate
our nuptials. When that is over, then I shall have a right to speak.”

“You have a right!” answered Mother Manon, “if things are so, the
marriage must take place forthwith. When that is done, all will go
right.”

“But, Mother Manon, Marietta always refuses to give me her consent.”

“Prepare the marriage feast.”

“But she will not even look kindly at me; and when I seat myself at her
side, the little savage jumps up and runs away.”

“Justice, only prepare the marriage feast.”

“But if Marietta resists--”

“We will take her by surprise. We will go to Father Jerome on Monday
morning early, and he shall quietly celebrate the marriage. This we can
easily accomplish with him. I am her mother, you the first judicial
person in Napoule. He must obey. Marietta need know nothing about it.
Early on Monday morning I will send her to Father Jerome all alone, with
a message so that she will suspect nothing. Then the priest shall speak
earnestly to her. Half an hour afterward we two will come. Then swiftly
to the altar. And even if Marietta should then say No, what does it
matter? The old Priest can hear nothing. But till then, mum to Marietta
and all Napoule.”

So the secret remained with the two. Marietta dreamed not of the good
luck which was in store for her. She thought only of Colin’s wickedness,
which had made her the common talk of the whole place. Oh! how she
repented her heedlessness about the ribbon; and yet in her heart she
forgave the reprobate his crime. Marietta was far too good. She told her
mother, she told all her playmates, “Colin has found my lost hat band. I
never gave it to him. He only wishes to vex me with it. You all know
that Colin was always ill-disposed towards me, and always sought to
mortify me!”

Ah! the poor child! she knew not what new abomination the malicious
fellow was again contriving.




THE BROKEN CUP.


Early in the morning Marietta went to the spring with the cup. There
were no flowers yet on the rock. It was still quite too early; for the
sun had scarcely risen from the sea.

Footsteps were heard. Colin came in sight, the flowers in his hand.
Marietta became very red. Colin stammered out “good morning, Marietta,”
 but the greeting came not from his heart, he could hardly bring it over
his lips.

“Why dost thou wear my ribbon so publicly, Colin?” said Marietta, and
placed the cup upon the rock. “I did not give it thee.”

“Thou didst not give it to me, dear Marietta?” asked he, and inward rage
made him deadly pale.

Marietta was ashamed of the falsehood, drooped her eyelids, and said
after a while, “Well, I did give it to thee, yet thou shouldst not have
worn it so openly. Give it me back again.”

Slowly he untied it; his anger was so great that he could not prevent
the tears from filling his eyes, nor the sighs from escaping his
breast.--“Dear Marietta, leave thy ribbon with me,” said he softly.

“No,” answered she.

Then his suppressed passion changed into desperation. Sighing, he looked
towards Heaven, then sadly on Marietta, who, silent and abashed, stood
by the spring with downcast eyes.

He wound the violet coloured ribbon around the stalks of the flowers,
said “there, take them all,” and threw the flowers so spitefully against
the magnificent cup upon the rock, that it was thrown down and dashed to
pieces. Maliciously he fled away.

Mother Manon lurking behind the window, had seen and heard all. When the
cup broke, hearing and sight left her. She was scarcely able to speak
for very horror. And as she pushed with all her strength against the
narrow window, to shout after the guilty one, it gave way, and with one
crash fell to the earth and was shattered in pieces.

So much ill luck would have discomposed any other woman. But Manon soon
recovered herself. “How lucky that I was a witness to this roguery!”
 exclaimed she; “he must to the Justice.--He shall replace both cup and
window-sash with his gold. It will give a rich dowry to Marietta But
when Marietta brought in the fragments of the shattered cup, when Manon
saw the Paradise lost, the good man Adam without a head, and of Eve not
a solitary limb remaining, the serpent unhurt, triumphing, the tiger
safe, but the little lamb gone even to the very tail, as if the tiger
had swallowed it, then Mother Manon screamed forth curses against Colin,
and said: ‘One can easily see that this _fall_ came from the hand of the
devil.’”




THE TRIBUNAL.

She took the cup in one hand, Marietta in the other, and went, about
nine o’clock, to when Monsieur Hautmartin was wont to sit in judgment.
She there made a great outcry, and showed the broken cup and the
Paradise lost. Marietta wept bitterly.

The justice, when he saw the broken cup and his beautiful bride in
tears, flew into so violent a rage toward Colin that his nose was
as violet-colored as Marietta’s well-known hat-band, He immediately
despatched his bailiffs to bring the criminal before him.

Colin came, overwhelmed with grief. Mother Manon now repeated
her complaint with great eloquence before justice, bailiffs, and
scribes.--But Colin listened not. He stepped to Marietta and whispered
to hen “Forgive me, dear Marietta, as I forgive thee. I broke thy cup
unintentionally; but thou, thou hast broken my heart!”

“What whispering is that?” cried Justice Hautmartin, with magisterial
authority. “Harken to this accusation, and defend yourself.”

“I have naught to defend. I broke the cup against my will,” said Colin.

“That I verily believe,” said Marietta, sobbing. “I am as guilty as he;
for I offended him--then he threw the ribbon and flowers to me. He could
not help it.”

“Well!” cried Mother Manon. “Do you intend to defend him? Mr. Justice,
pronounce his sentence. He has broken the cup, and he does not deny it.”

“Since you cannot deny it, Mr. Colin,” said the Justice, “you must pay
three hundred livres for the cup, for it is worth that; and then for--”

“No,” interrupted Colin, “it is not worth that. I bought it at Vence for
Marietta for a hundred livres.”

“You bought it, sir brazen face?” shrieked the Justice, and his whole
face became like Marietta’s hat-hand. He could not and would not say
more, for he dreaded a disagreeable investigation of the matter.

But Colin was vexed at the imputation, and said: “I sent this cup on
the evening of the fair, by your own servant, to Marietta. There stands
Jacques in the door. Speak, Jacques, did I not give thee the box to
carry to Mother Manon?”

Monsieur Hautmartin wished to interrupt this conversation by speaking
loudly. But the simple Jacques said: “Only recollect, Justice, you took
away Colin’s box from me, and carried what was in it to Mother Manon.
The box lies there under the papers.”

Then the bailiffs were ordered to remove the simpleton; and Colin was
also directed to retire, until he should be sent for again.

“Very well, Mr. Justice,” interposed Colin, “but this business shall be
your last in Napoule. I know this, that you would ingratiate yourself
with Mother Manon and Marietta by means of my property. When you want
me, you will have to ride to Grasse to the Governor’s.” With that, Colin
departed.

Monsieur Hautmartin was quite puzzled with this affair, and in his
confusion knew not what he was about. Manon shook her head. The affair
was dark and mysterious to her. “Who will now pay me for the broken
cup?” she asked.

“To me,” said Marietta, with glowing, brightened countenance, “_to me_
it is already paid for.”




MYSTERIOUS DISPENSATIONS.

Colin rode that same day to the Governor at Grasse, and came back
early the next morning. But Justice Hautmartin only laughed at him, and
removed all of Mother Manon’s suspicions by swearing he would let his
nose be cut off if Colin did not pay three hundred livres for the broken
cup. He also went with Mother Manon to talk with Father Jerome about
the marriage, and impressed upon him the necessity of earnestly setting
before Marietta her duty _as_ an obedient daughter in not opposing
the will of her mother. This the pious old man promised, although he
understood not the half of what they shouted in his ear.

When Monday morning came Mother Manon said to her daughter: “Dress
yourself handsomely, and carry this myrtle wreath to Father Jerome; he
wants it for a bride.” Marietta dressed herself in her Sunday clothes,
took the myrtle wreath unsuspiciously, and carried it to Father Jerome.

On the way Colin met her, and greeted her joyfully, though timidly; and
when she told him where she was taking the wreath, Colin said: “I am
going the same way, for I am carrying the money for the church’s tenths
to the priest.” And as they went on he took her hand silently, and both
trembled as if they designed some crime against each other.

“Hast thou forgiven me?” whispered Colin, anxiously. “Ah! Marietta, what
have I done to thee, that thou art so cruel toward me?”

She could only say: “Be quiet, Colin, you shall have the ribbon again;
and I will preserve the cup since it came from you! Did it really come
from you?”

“Ah! Marietta, canst thou doubt it? All I have I would gladly give thee.
Wilt thou, hereafter, be as kind to me as thou art to others?”

She replied not. But as she entered the parsonage she looked aside at
him, and when she saw his fine eyes filled with tears, she whispered
softly: “Dear Colin!” Then he bent down and kissed her hand. With this
the door of a chamber opened and Father Jerome, with venerable aspect,
stood before them. The young couple held fast to each other. I know not
whether this was the effect of the hand-kissing, or the awe they felt
for the sage.

Marietta handed him the myrtle wreath. He laid it upon her head and
said: “Little children, love one another;” and then urged the good
maiden, in the most touching and pathetic manner, to love Colin. For
the old gentleman, from his hardness of hearing, had either mistaken the
name of the bridegroom, or forgotten it, and thought Colin must be the
bridegroom.

Then Marietta’s heart softened under the exhortation, and with tears and
sobs she exclaimed: “Ah! I have loved him for a long time, but he hates
me.”

“I hate thee, Marietta?” cried Colin. “My soul has lived only in thee
since thou earnest to Napoule. Oh! Marietta, how could I hope and
believe that thou didst love me? Does not all Napoule worship thee?”

“Why, then, dost thou avoid me, Colin, and prefer all my companions
before me?”

“Oh! Marietta, I feared and trembled with love and anxiety when I beheld
thee; I had not the courage to approach thee; and when I was away from
thee I was most miserable.”

As they talked thus with each other the good father thought they were
quarreling; and he threw his arms around them, brought them together,
and said imploringly: “Little children, love one another.”

Then Marietta sank on Colin’s breast, and Colin threw his arms around
her, and both faces beamed with rapture. They forgot the priest, the
whole world. Each was sunk into the other, Both had so completely lost
their recollection that, unwittingly, they followed the delightful
Father Jerome into the church and before the altar.

“Marietta!” sighed he.

“Colin!” sighed she.

In the church there were many devout worshipers; but they witnessed
Colin’s and Marietta’s marriage with amazement. Many ran out before the
close of the ceremony, to spread the news throughout Napoule: “Colin and
Marietta are married.”

When the solemnization was over, Father Jerome rejoiced that he had
succeeded so well, and that such little opposition had been made by the
parties. He led them into the parsonage.




END OF THIS MEMORABLE HISTORY.

Then Mother Manon arrived, breathless; she had waited at home a long
time for the bride-groom. He had not arrived. At the last stroke of the
clock she grew anxious and went to Monsieur Hautmartin’s. There anew
surprise awaited her. She learned that the Governor, together with
the officers of the Viguerie, had appeared and taken possession of
the accounts, chests, and papers of the justice and at the same time
arrested Monsieur Hautmartin.

“This, surely, is the work of that wicked Colin,” thought she, and
hurried to the parsonage in order to apologize to Father Jerome for
delaying the marriage. The good gray-headed old man advanced toward her,
proud of his work, and leading by the hand the newly married pair.

Now Mother Manon lost her wits and her speech in good earnest when she
learned what had happened. But Colin had more thoughts and power of
speech than in his whole previous life. He told of his love and the
broken cup, the falsehood of the justice, and how he had unmasked this
unjust magistrate in the Viguerie at Grasse. Then he besought Mother
Manon’s blessing, since all this had happened without any fault on the
part of Marietta or himself.

Father Jerome, who for a long while could not make out what had
happened, when he received a full explanation of the marriage through
mistake, piously folded his hands and exclaimed, with uplifted eyes:
“Wonderful are the dispensations of Providence!” Colin and Marietta
kissed his hands; Mother Manon, through sheer veneration of heaven, gave
the young couple her blessing, but remarked incidentally that her head
seemed turned round.

Mother Manon herself was pleased with her son-in-law when she came to
know the full extent of his property, and especially when she found that
Monsieur Hautmartin and his nose had been arrested.

“But am I then really a wife?” asked Marietta; “and really Colin’s
wife?”

Mother Manon nodded her head, and Marietta hung upon Colin’s arm. Thus
they went to Colin’s farm, to his dwelling-house, through the garden.

“Look at the flowers, Marietta,” said Colin; “how carefully I cultivated
them for your cup!”

Colin, who had not expected so pleasant an event, now prepared a wedding
feast on the spur of the occasion. Two days was it continued. All
Napoule was feasted. Who shall describe Colin’s extravagance?

The broken cup is preserved in the family to the present day as a
memorial and sacred relic.







End of Project Gutenberg’s The Broken Cup, by Johann Heinrich Daniel Zschokke

